docs/src/docs/asciidoc/objectMapping/customTypes.adoc, before:

GORM for MongoDB will persist all common known Java types like String, Integer, URL etc., however if you want to persist one of your own classes that is not a domain class you can implement a custom user type.

==== Custom Codecs

GORM for MongoDB is built ontop of MongoDB's BSON encoding framework. This means it is possible to implement custom http://mongodb.github.io/mongo-java-driver/3.2/bson/codecs[Codecs] for encoding and decoding values to and from BSON.

For example consider the following simple Groovy class:

[source,groovy]
----
class Birthday {
    Date date
}
----

By default the encoding engine does not know how to represent this type as a BSON value. To make the encoding engine understand this type you have to implement a custom codec:


[source,groovy]
----
import org.bson.*
import org.bson.codecs.*

class BirthdayCodec implements Codec<Birthday> {
    Birthday decode(BsonReader reader, DecoderContext decoderContext) {
        return new Birthday(date: new Date(reader.readDateTime())) <1>
    }
    void encode(BsonWriter writer, Birthday value, EncoderContext encoderContext) {
        writer.writeDateTime(value.date.time) <2>
    }
    Class<Birthday> getEncoderClass() { Birthday } <3>
}
----

<1> Decodes the `Birthday` type from the `BsonReader`
<2> Encodes the `Birthday` type to the `BsonWriter`
<3> Returns the type that is to be encoded. In this case `Birthday`.

With that done you then need to register the custom `Codec`. There are two ways to achieve this.

You can register a list of codecs in the `grails.mongodb.codecs` setting in `application.yml`:

[source,yaml]
----
grails:
    mongodb:
        codecs:
            - my.company.BirthdayCodec
----

Or you can create a `META-INF/services/org.bson.Codec` file containing the class name of the `Codec`

==== Custom Types with GORM

Another option is to define a GORM custom type. For example consider the following class:

[source,groovy]
----
class Birthday implements Comparable{
    Date date

    Birthday(Date date) {
        this.date = date
    }

    @Override
    int compareTo(Object t) {
        date.compareTo(t.date)
    }
}
----

NOTE: Custom types should go in src/groovy not grails-app/domain

If you attempt to reference this class from a domain class it will not automatically be persisted for you. However you can create a custom type implementation and register it with Spring. For example:

[source,groovy]
----
import groovy.transform.InheritConstructors
import org.bson.Document
import org.grails.datastore.mapping.engine.types.AbstractMappingAwareCustomTypeMarshaller
import org.grails.datastore.mapping.model.PersistentProperty
import org.grails.datastore.mapping.mongo.query.MongoQuery
import org.grails.datastore.mapping.query.Query

@InheritConstructors
class BirthdayType extends AbstractMappingAwareCustomTypeMarshaller<Birthday, Document, Document> {
   @Override
   protected Object writeInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, Birthday value, Document nativeTarget) {
       final converted = value.date.time
       nativeTarget.put(key, converted)
       return converted
   }

   @Override
   protected void queryInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, PropertyCriterion criterion, Document nativeQuery) {
       if (criterion instanceof Between) {
           def dbo = new BasicDBObject()
           dbo.put(MongoQuery.MONGO_GTE_OPERATOR, criterion.getFrom().date.time)
           dbo.put(MongoQuery.MONGO_LTE_OPERATOR, criterion.getTo().date.time)
           nativeQuery.put(key, dbo)
       }
       else {
           nativeQuery.put(key, criterion.value.date.time)
       }
   }

   @Override
   protected Birthday readInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, Document nativeSource) {
       final num = nativeSource.get(key)
       if (num instanceof Long) {
           return new Birthday(new Date(num))
       }
       return null
   }
})
----

The above `BirthdayType` class is a custom user type implementation for MongoDB for the `Birthday` class. It provides implementations for three methods: `readInternal`, `writeInternal` and the optional `queryInternal`. If you do not implement `queryInternal` your custom type can be persisted but not queried.

The `writeInternal` method gets passed the property, the key to store it under, the value and the native DBObject where the custom type is to be stored:

[source,groovy]
----
@Override
protected Object writeInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, Birthday value, DBObject nativeTarget) {
    final converted = value.date.time
    nativeTarget.put(key, converted)
    return converted
}
----

You can then read the values of the custom type and register them with the `DBObject`. The `readInternal` method gets passed the `PersistentProperty`, the key the user type info is stored under (although you may want to use multiple keys) and the `DBObject`:

[source,groovy]
----
@Override
protected Birthday readInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, Document nativeSource) {
    final num = nativeSource.get(key)
    if(num instanceof Long) {
        return new Birthday(new Date(num))
    }
    return null
}
----

You can then construct the custom type by reading values from the `DBObject`. Finally the `queryInternal` method allows you to handle how a custom type is queried:

[source,groovy]
----
@Override
protected void queryInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, Query.PropertyCriterion criterion, Document nativeQuery) {
    if(criterion instanceof Between) {
        def dbo = new BasicDBObject()
        dbo.put(MongoQuery.MONGO_GTE_OPERATOR, criterion.getFrom().date.time);
        dbo.put(MongoQuery.MONGO_LTE_OPERATOR, criterion.getTo().date.time);
        nativeQuery.put(key, dbo)
    }
    else if(criterion instanceof Equals){
        nativeQuery.put(key, criterion.value.date.time)
    }
    else {
	    throw new RuntimeException("unsupported query type for property $property")
    }
}
----

The method gets passed a `criterion` which is the type of query and depending on the type of query you may handle the query differently. For example the above implementation supports `between` and `equals` style queries. So the following 2 queries will work:

[source,groovy]
----
Person.findByBirthday(new Birthday(new Date()-7)) // find someone who was born 7 days ago
Person.findByBirthdayBetween(new Birthday(new Date()-7), new Birthday(new Date())) // find someone who was born in the last 7 days
----

However "like" or other query types will not work.

To register a custom type in a grails application simply register it as Spring bean. For example, to register the above `BirthdayType` add the following to grails-app/conf/spring/resources.groovy:

[source,groovy]
----
import com.example.*

// Place your Spring DSL code here
beans = {
  birthdayType(BirthdayType, Birthday)
}
----

Commit message:

Fix documentation around registering codec classes

docs/src/docs/asciidoc/objectMapping/customTypes.adoc, after:

GORM for MongoDB will persist all common known Java types like String, Integer, URL etc., however if you want to persist one of your own classes that is not a domain class you can implement a custom user type.

==== Custom Codecs

GORM for MongoDB is built ontop of MongoDB's BSON encoding framework. This means it is possible to implement custom http://mongodb.github.io/mongo-java-driver/3.2/bson/codecs[Codecs] for encoding and decoding values to and from BSON.

For example consider the following simple Groovy class:

[source,groovy]
----
class Birthday {
    Date date
}
----

By default the encoding engine does not know how to represent this type as a BSON value. To make the encoding engine understand this type you have to implement a custom codec:


[source,groovy]
----
import org.bson.*
import org.bson.codecs.*

class BirthdayCodec implements Codec<Birthday> {
    Birthday decode(BsonReader reader, DecoderContext decoderContext) {
        return new Birthday(date: new Date(reader.readDateTime())) <1>
    }
    void encode(BsonWriter writer, Birthday value, EncoderContext encoderContext) {
        writer.writeDateTime(value.date.time) <2>
    }
    Class<Birthday> getEncoderClass() { Birthday } <3>
}
----

<1> Decodes the `Birthday` type from the `BsonReader`
<2> Encodes the `Birthday` type to the `BsonWriter`
<3> Returns the type that is to be encoded. In this case `Birthday`.

With that done you then need to register the custom `Codec`. There are two ways to achieve this.

You can register a list of codecs in the `grails.mongodb.codecs` setting in `application.yml`:

[source,yaml]
----
grails:
    mongodb:
        codecs:
            - my.company.BirthdayCodec
----

Or you can create a `META-INF/services/org.bson.codecs.Codec` file containing the fully qualified class name of the `Codec`. If there are multiple codec classes you would like to register, put each one on a separate line.

==== Custom Types with GORM

Another option is to define a GORM custom type. For example consider the following class:

[source,groovy]
----
class Birthday implements Comparable{
    Date date

    Birthday(Date date) {
        this.date = date
    }

    @Override
    int compareTo(Object t) {
        date.compareTo(t.date)
    }
}
----

NOTE: Custom types should go in src/groovy not grails-app/domain

If you attempt to reference this class from a domain class it will not automatically be persisted for you. However you can create a custom type implementation and register it with Spring. For example:

[source,groovy]
----
import groovy.transform.InheritConstructors
import org.bson.Document
import org.grails.datastore.mapping.engine.types.AbstractMappingAwareCustomTypeMarshaller
import org.grails.datastore.mapping.model.PersistentProperty
import org.grails.datastore.mapping.mongo.query.MongoQuery
import org.grails.datastore.mapping.query.Query

@InheritConstructors
class BirthdayType extends AbstractMappingAwareCustomTypeMarshaller<Birthday, Document, Document> {
   @Override
   protected Object writeInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, Birthday value, Document nativeTarget) {
       final converted = value.date.time
       nativeTarget.put(key, converted)
       return converted
   }

   @Override
   protected void queryInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, PropertyCriterion criterion, Document nativeQuery) {
       if (criterion instanceof Between) {
           def dbo = new BasicDBObject()
           dbo.put(MongoQuery.MONGO_GTE_OPERATOR, criterion.getFrom().date.time)
           dbo.put(MongoQuery.MONGO_LTE_OPERATOR, criterion.getTo().date.time)
           nativeQuery.put(key, dbo)
       }
       else {
           nativeQuery.put(key, criterion.value.date.time)
       }
   }

   @Override
   protected Birthday readInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, Document nativeSource) {
       final num = nativeSource.get(key)
       if (num instanceof Long) {
           return new Birthday(new Date(num))
       }
       return null
   }
})
----

The above `BirthdayType` class is a custom user type implementation for MongoDB for the `Birthday` class. It provides implementations for three methods: `readInternal`, `writeInternal` and the optional `queryInternal`. If you do not implement `queryInternal` your custom type can be persisted but not queried.

The `writeInternal` method gets passed the property, the key to store it under, the value and the native DBObject where the custom type is to be stored:

[source,groovy]
----
@Override
protected Object writeInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, Birthday value, DBObject nativeTarget) {
    final converted = value.date.time
    nativeTarget.put(key, converted)
    return converted
}
----

You can then read the values of the custom type and register them with the `DBObject`. The `readInternal` method gets passed the `PersistentProperty`, the key the user type info is stored under (although you may want to use multiple keys) and the `DBObject`:

[source,groovy]
----
@Override
protected Birthday readInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, Document nativeSource) {
    final num = nativeSource.get(key)
    if(num instanceof Long) {
        return new Birthday(new Date(num))
    }
    return null
}
----

You can then construct the custom type by reading values from the `DBObject`. Finally the `queryInternal` method allows you to handle how a custom type is queried:

[source,groovy]
----
@Override
protected void queryInternal(PersistentProperty property, String key, Query.PropertyCriterion criterion, Document nativeQuery) {
    if(criterion instanceof Between) {
        def dbo = new BasicDBObject()
        dbo.put(MongoQuery.MONGO_GTE_OPERATOR, criterion.getFrom().date.time);
        dbo.put(MongoQuery.MONGO_LTE_OPERATOR, criterion.getTo().date.time);
        nativeQuery.put(key, dbo)
    }
    else if(criterion instanceof Equals){
        nativeQuery.put(key, criterion.value.date.time)
    }
    else {
	    throw new RuntimeException("unsupported query type for property $property")
    }
}
----

The method gets passed a `criterion` which is the type of query and depending on the type of query you may handle the query differently. For example the above implementation supports `between` and `equals` style queries. So the following 2 queries will work:

[source,groovy]
----
Person.findByBirthday(new Birthday(new Date()-7)) // find someone who was born 7 days ago
Person.findByBirthdayBetween(new Birthday(new Date()-7), new Birthday(new Date())) // find someone who was born in the last 7 days
----

However "like" or other query types will not work.

To register a custom type in a grails application simply register it as Spring bean. For example, to register the above `BirthdayType` add the following to grails-app/conf/spring/resources.groovy:

[source,groovy]
----
import com.example.*

// Place your Spring DSL code here
beans = {
  birthdayType(BirthdayType, Birthday)
}
----
