docs/src/docs/asciidoc/testing.adoc, before:

To write unit tests with MongoDB and Spock you can simply extend from `grails.test.mongodb.MongoSpec`.

`MongoSpec` is an abstract class that will initialise GORM in the setup phase of the specification being executed. It
uses by default a `MongoClient` instance that connects to a MongoDB instance as defined in your configuration
(by default, `localhost` and port `27017`, see <<gettingStarted>> for more details):

[source,groovy]
----
include::{sourcedir}/examples/grails3-mongodb/src/test/groovy/functional/tests/LocalMongoUnitSpec.groovy[tags=structure]
----

You can also provide your own `MongoClient` instance to use something such as https://github.com/fakemongo/fongo[Fongo],
as shown in the following example:

[source,groovy]
----
include::{sourcedir}/examples/grails3-mongodb/src/test/groovy/functional/tests/BookUnitSpec.groovy[]
----

Note that the default implementation is to scan your classpath searching for domain classes, from the package defined
in the configuration property `grails.codegen.defaultPackage`, and all the way down its subpackages. If your application
is large, classpath scanning may be slow, so it's better to override the method `getDomainClasses()`:

[source,groovy]
----
include::{sourcedir}/examples/grails3-hibernate5-mongodb/src/test/groovy/functional/tests/BookFongoSpec.groovy[tags=getDomainClasses,indent=0]
----

Commit message:

docs: Remove mentioning of Fongo
Change text as the example test case no longer uses Fongo.
Add the EmbeddedMongoClient trait to the documentation as
the example is not complete without it. Mention that the
test examples now use testcontainers.

Close #154

docs/src/docs/asciidoc/testing.adoc, after:

To write unit tests with MongoDB and Spock you can simply extend from `grails.test.mongodb.MongoSpec`.

`MongoSpec` is an abstract class that will initialise GORM in the setup phase of the specification being executed. It
uses by default a `MongoClient` instance that connects to a MongoDB instance as defined in your configuration
(by default, `localhost` and port `27017`, see <<gettingStarted>> for more details):

It is preferable to use testcontainers to automatically run MongoDB in a containerized environment and not have to run a MongoDB instance locally. The following examples use testcontainers:

[source,groovy]
----
include::{sourcedir}/examples/grails3-mongodb/src/test/groovy/functional/tests/EmbeddedMongoClient.groovy[]
----

[source,groovy]
----
include::{sourcedir}/examples/grails3-mongodb/src/test/groovy/functional/tests/LocalMongoUnitSpec.groovy[tags=structure]
----

You can also use your own low-level `MongoClient` instance, as shown in the following example:

[source,groovy]
----
include::{sourcedir}/examples/grails3-mongodb/src/test/groovy/functional/tests/BookUnitSpec.groovy[]
----

Note that the default implementation is to scan your classpath searching for domain classes, from the package defined
in the configuration property `grails.codegen.defaultPackage`, and all the way down its subpackages. If your application
is large, classpath scanning may be slow, so it's better to override the method `getDomainClasses()`:

[source,groovy]
----
include::{sourcedir}/examples/grails3-hibernate5-mongodb/src/test/groovy/functional/tests/BookFongoSpec.groovy[tags=getDomainClasses,indent=0]
----
